PXC-3688 Document NBO OSU mode (8.0) (#1453)
percona/percona-xtradb-cluster: doc/source/features/online-schema-changes.rst

.. _online-schema-changes:

===================================================
Online Schema Changes
===================================================

> A failure in a schema change can cause your cluster to drop nodes and lose data. |Percona XtraDB Cluster| supports the following methods for making online schema changes:

Reviewer: Do we want to start a page describing schema changes by mentioning a failure, without first explaining what an online schema change is, or how and why a failure can occur?

Author: Fixed.

.. list-table::
    :widths: 20 60
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Method 
      - Description
    * - `TOI`
      - Total Order Isolation
        
        The default DDL replication method for the :ref:`wsrep osu method` variable. The isolation of the DDL statement guarantees consistency.
        
        The node detects a DDL statement in the Parser stage and sends the statement to all nodes. All nodes wait for any earlier transactions to commit, and then execute the statement.
        

>         All other writes must wait until the DDL statement is executed. While a DDL statement is running, any long-running transactions in progress and using the same resource receive a deadlock error at commit and are rolled back. There is no way to verify if individual nodes have succeeded in processing the DDL statement. 

Reviewer: "There is no way to verify if individual nodes have succeeded in processing the DDL statement. " - what do you mean by this? If TOI succeeds, all nodes successfully completed the DDL statement, and it can also be verified by executing something like SHOW CREATE TABLE.

If one of the nodes failed, the DDL will fail everywhere, and the error itself won't show which nodes failed applying the DDL - but it will show up in the error log.

Author: Removed.

    * - `RSU`
      - Rolling  Schema Upgrade

>         A DDL statement are processed on each nod locally. This action guarantees high availability. The node desynchronizes with the cluster and disables flow control while executing the DDL statement. The rest of the cluster is not affected. After the statement execution, the node applies delayed events and synchronizes with the cluster. 

Reviewer: DDL statements are processed on each nod locally maybe?

Author: Fixed.

>         The cluster continues to operate, although during the process, some nodes may be updated and some nodes may have the older schema structure.

Reviewer: "may be": it's not a possibility, it is certain, since the user executes the DDL separately on each node. As long as there are more than 1 node in the cluster, there will be schema differences, and because of that, possibly consistency issues.

Author: Fixed.

        For this method, the ``gcache`` must be large enough to store the data for the duration of the DDL change. 
    * - `NBO`

>       - Non-Blocking Operation

Reviewer: @georgelorchpercona shouldn' t NBO be an experimental feature in the next release?

Reviewer 2: @dutow I thought we discussed that this is not practical to call "Tech Preview" as it is pretty core changes that can not be avoided regardless of enabled or not.

Reviewer 2: OK, yes, this feature is going to be tagged as "Tech Preview" in 8.0.25, if no serious issues present themselves, it can go to GA in 8.0.27

Author: Added.

>         This method is similar to ``TOI``. All nodes acquire metadata locks on each table or schema for any open transactions and do not release those locks until the transaction ends. The DDL statements execute on all nodes after the transactions have completed. This method avoids the TOI issue when a long-running DDL blocks other updates in the cluster.

Reviewer: I don't understand "for any open transactions"? They acquire the MDLs required for the DDL, which at that point is just starting.

"The DDL statements execute on all nodes after the transactions have completed" - I also don't understand this. You mean that the transaction on each node commits after each node successfully executed the DDL statement?

Author: Rewritten.

>         For this method, the ``gcache`` must be large enough to store the data for duration of the DDL statement. 

Reviewer: Is this a copy paste error from RSU?

Author: Fixed after discussion.

Using the NBO method
----------------------

> You set the method for online schema changes by either using the ``wsrep_OSU_method`` variable in ``my.cnf`` or  using the ``SET`` statement in a MySQL client. 

Reviewer: You shouldn't set it in my.cnf, as NBO doesn't support all DDL operations. Many DDLs would simply fail.

Author: Removed.

To set the variable in the my.cnf file, do the following:

.. sourcecode:: text

    wsrep_osu_method=NBO

Restart the server. 

To dynamically set the ``NBO`` method in the client, run the following statement:

.. sourcecode:: mysql

>     SET GLOBAL wsrep_OSU_method='NBO';

Reviewer: wsrep_OSU_method is a session variable, users most likely want to set NBO for a session, not globally.

Author: Changed to SESSION

> Limitations

Reviewer: Most of the limitations mentioned here are true for all methods.

SInce the page is called "online schema changes", not "NBO online schema change", why do we say that these are NBO limitations?

I also don't see the main NBO limitation mentioned: that it only supports some DDL statements, and that it doesn't support running two ALTER on the same table (or more specifically: two DDLs with conflicting locks) at the same time, one of them will error out.

Author: Added.

-----------------

The following items are the limitations of using ``NBO``:

> * Write attempts are blocked until the ``ALTER`` statement completes. If the DDL statement is ``ALTER TABLE ... LOCK=SHARED``, read operations are allowed. If the statement is ``ALTER TABLE ... LOCK=EXCLUSIVE``, read operations are not allowed.

Reviewer: This just describes how MySQL works, what's the PXC/NBO limitation here?

Author: Changed to say NBO OSC

> * Ensure a long transaction is not executing against the table being altered. The cluster may block the NBO from acquiring the necessary metadata locks. 

Reviewer: This shouldn't happen, a high priority DDL should just abort any conflicting transactions, same as with TOI.

Author: Removed.

* Nodes cannot be donors for SST during the non-blocking operation. 

* If a node leaves the cluster during the NBO DDL operation the node's data files will be inconsistent. The node can only rejoin the cluster by SST.

* NBO operations can only work with statements that involve one table at a time.

> * You cannot run more than one method at a time. 

Reviewer: this isn't true, you can start an NBO and a TOI transaction at the same time for example, and the cluster will handle it.

Author: Removed.

        
        All other writes must wait until the DDL statement is executed. While a DDL statement is running, any long-running transactions in progress and using the same resource receive a deadlock error at commit and are rolled back.  
    * - `RSU`
      - Rolling  Schema Upgrade

        This method guarantees high availability. 
         
        The node desynchronizes with the cluster and disables flow control during the execution of the DDL statement. The rest of the cluster is not affected. After the statement execution, the node applies delayed events and synchronizes with the cluster. 

        Although the cluster continues to active during the process, some nodes are updated and some nodes have the older schema structure. The RSU method is a manual operation.

        For this method, the ``gcache`` must be large enough to store the data for the duration of the DDL change. 
    * - `NBO`
      - Non-Blocking Operation

>         Implemented in version 25-15, |Percona XtraBackup| supports ``Non-Blocking Operation`` for :ref:`supported-ddl`. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        Implemented in version 25-15, |Percona XtraDB Cluster| supports ``Non-Blocking Operation`` for :ref:`supported-ddl`. 
```

Author: Fixed.
